DOCSP-43464: operations with builders (#206)
mongodb/docs-php-library: source/builders.txt

.. _php-builders:

========================
Operations with Builders
========================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: aggregation, query, code example, type-safe

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn about the **builder classes**
that the {+library-short+} provides to create types used in your

> operations. You can use the builder classes and factory methods from the
> :ref:`php-aggregation-builder-api` feature to create filters for other
> operations such as find, update, and delete operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operations. You can use the builder classes and factory methods from the
aggregation builder feature to create filters for other
operations such as find, update, and delete operations. To learn more about aggregation builders,
see the :ref:`php-aggregation-builder-api` section of the {+library-short+}'s aggregation guide. 
```
S: Include link intro text
style guide: "Link text should begin with the purpose of the cross-reference"

Using builders to create queries helps you identify errors at compile

> time and avoid them at runtime. This guide provides information on
> builder classes that you can use for the following tasks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
time and avoid them at runtime. This guide provides information on
builder classes in the following sections:
```
S: Introduce that these are links to the below sections. Consider using the same names as the section titles as well.

instantiate a ``MongoDB\Client`` that connects to an Atlas cluster
and assign the following value to your ``$collection`` variable:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/builders.php
   :language: php
   :dedent:
   :start-after: start-db-coll
   :end-before: end-db-coll

To learn how to create a free MongoDB Atlas cluster and load the sample
datasets, see the :atlas:`Get Started with Atlas </getting-started>` guide.

Import Builder Classes
----------------------

To run the examples in this guide, you must import the following classes
into your application:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/builders.php
   :language: php
   :dedent:
   :start-after: start-imports
   :end-before: end-imports

.. _php-builders-filter:

Create a Filter
---------------

You can use factory methods from the ``Query`` builder class to create
filter definitions to use in find, update, and delete operations. To
learn more about creating filters, see the :ref:`php-specify-query` guide.

The following steps describe how to create a filter definition by using
builders:

1. Instantiate the ``QueryInterface`` by calling the ``Query::query()``
   method.
   

> #. Pass the field name to compare and a factory method from the

Author: reworded

   .. output::
      :language: json
      :visible: false

      {"_id":...,"feature_type":"Wrecks - Visible","coordinates":[-79.9137115,9.3390503],...}
      {"_id":...,"feature_type":"Wrecks - Visible","coordinates":[-79.9357223,9.3340302],...}
      {"_id":...,"feature_type":"Wrecks - Visible","coordinates":[-79.9081268,9.3547792],...}
      // Results truncated

To learn more about find operations, see the :ref:`php-retrieve` guide.

Delete Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This example performs the following actions:

- Uses the ``Query::regex()`` factory method to match documents in which
  the ``feature_type`` field value contains the string ``'nondangerous'``
- Calls the :phpmethod:`MongoDB\Collection::deleteOne()`
  method to delete the first matching document
- Prints the number of deleted documents

.. io-code-block::
   :copyable:   

   .. input:: /includes/builders.php
      :start-after: start-deleteone
      :end-before: end-deleteone
      :language: php
      :dedent:

   .. output::
      :language: none
      :visible: false

      Deleted documents: 1

To learn more about delete operations, see the :ref:`php-write-delete`
guide.

.. _php-builders-update:

> Define an Update Document

Author: This section isn't about performing updates, it is about using builders to create the update document

> Define an Update Document

Reviewer: I would define exactly what is meant by an update document then. I'll leave a comment as example, should be simple.

-------------------------

You can use factory methods from the ``Stage`` builder class to update
or create field values in your update operations. To learn more about
updating documents, see the :ref:`php-write-update` guide.

.. important::
    
   The only update operation that you can express by using builders uses
   the ``$set`` operator. This operator allows you to replace the value of
   a field with a specified value or create a new field that has a specified
   value. To learn more, see the :manual:`$set </reference/operator/update/set/>`
   reference in the {+mdb-server+} manual.

> The following steps describe how to create an update document by using

Author: The builders do not actually update the document, they are just used to create the update document/specify the update. So, i believe wording should stay

builders:

1. Create a ``Pipeline`` instance.
   
#. Pass one or more ``$set`` stages by calling the ``Stage::set()``
   method and passing a field name and a value.

> The following code shows the template to define an update by using

Author: See other comments

builders:

.. code-block:: php
    
   $update = new Pipeline(
       Stage::set(<field name>: <value>),
       Stage::set(<field name>: <value>),
       ...
   );

This example performs the following actions:

- Uses the ``Query::eq()`` factory method to match documents in which
  the ``watlev`` field value is ``'partly submerged at high water'``
- Uses builders to specify an update that sets
  sets the ``year`` field to ``1870``
- Calls the :phpmethod:`MongoDB\Collection::updateOne()`
  method to perform the update
- Prints the number of updated documents

> .. io-code-block::

Reviewer: S: For long code examples like this, I think code comments would be helpful to include at each section break

   :copyable:   

   .. input:: /includes/builders.php
      :start-after: start-updateone
      :end-before: end-updateone
      :language: php
      :dedent:

   .. output::
      :language: none
      :visible: false

      Updated documents: 1

.. _php-builders-changestream:

Modify Change Stream Output
---------------------------

You can use factory methods from the ``Stage`` class to modify a change
stream's output by creating a pipeline. To learn more about change
streams, see the :ref:`php-change-streams` guide.

The following steps describe how to create a change stream filter by
using builders:

1. Create an array.
   

> #. Pass one or more ``$match`` stages by calling factory methods from

Author: The PHP team is not publishing API docs for the builder methods - see the comments on https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/DOCSP-43919

The aggregation builder page has more info that says that there is a supported builder for every agg operator

   the ``Stage`` class and the required parameters.

The following code shows the template to modify change stream output by
using builders:

.. code-block:: php

   $pipeline = [
       Stage::<factory method>(...),
       Stage::<factory method>(...),
       ...
   ];

You can pass this pipeline to the following methods:

- :phpmethod:`MongoDB\Client::watch()`
- :phpmethod:`MongoDB\Database::watch()`
- :phpmethod:`MongoDB\Collection::watch()`

This example performs the following actions:

- Uses the ``Stage::match()`` method to filter for only update change
  events
- Uses the ``Stage::project()`` method to output only the specified change
  event fields

> - Calls the :phpmethod:`MongoDB\Collection::watch()`
>   method to open the change stream with the option to output the full
>   document after update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Calls the :phpmethod:`MongoDB\Collection::watch()`
  method to open the change stream with the ``fullDocument`` option to output the full
  document after update
```
S: Include the option name for clarity

- Prints change events as they occur

.. io-code-block::
   :copyable:   

   .. input:: /includes/builders.php
      :start-after: start-cs
      :end-before: end-cs
      :language: php
      :dedent:

   .. output::
      :language: json
      :visible: false

      {
        "_id":...,
        "operationType":"update",
        "fullDocument":{"_id":...,"feature_type":"Wrecks - Visible",...},
        "ns":{"db":"sample_geospatial","coll":"shipwrecks"}

>       }

Reviewer: S: And API documentation section would be helpful 
```suggestion
      }
     
Additional Information
----------------------
```

Author: see other reply about API documentation

      {"_id":...,"feature_type":"Wrecks - Visible","coordinates":[-79.9081268,9.3547792],...}
      // Results truncated

To learn more about find operations, see the :ref:`php-retrieve` guide.

Delete Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This example performs the following actions:

- Uses the ``Query::regex()`` factory method to match documents in which
  the ``feature_type`` field value contains the string ``'nondangerous'``
- Calls the :phpmethod:`MongoDB\Collection::deleteOne()`
  method to delete the first matching document
- Prints the number of deleted documents

.. io-code-block::
   :copyable:   

   .. input:: /includes/builders.php
      :start-after: start-deleteone
      :end-before: end-deleteone
      :language: php
      :dedent:

   .. output::
      :language: none
      :visible: false

      Deleted documents: 1

To learn more about delete operations, see the :ref:`php-write-delete`
guide.

.. _php-builders-update:

Define an Update Document
-------------------------

You can use factory methods from the ``Stage`` builder class to update
or create field values in your update operations. To learn more about
updating documents, see the :ref:`php-write-update` guide.

> .. important:: Only $set Operator Supported

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. important:: Only $set Operator Supported for Update Operations
```
S: For clarity

``sample_geospatial`` database from the :atlas:`Atlas sample datasets
</sample-data>`. To access this collection from your PHP application,
instantiate a ``MongoDB\Client`` that connects to an Atlas cluster
and assign the following value to your ``$collection`` variable:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/builders.php
   :language: php
   :dedent:
   :start-after: start-db-coll
   :end-before: end-db-coll

To learn how to create a free MongoDB Atlas cluster and load the sample
datasets, see the :atlas:`Get Started with Atlas </getting-started>` guide.

Import Builder Classes
----------------------

To run the examples in this guide, you must import the following classes
into your application:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/builders.php
   :language: php
   :dedent:
   :start-after: start-imports
   :end-before: end-imports

.. _php-builders-filter:

Create a Filter
---------------

You can use factory methods from the ``Query`` builder class to create
filter definitions to use in find, update, and delete operations. To
learn more about creating filters, see the :ref:`php-specify-query` guide.

The following steps describe how to create a filter definition by using
builders:

> 1. Instantiate the ``QueryInterface`` by calling the ``Query::query()``

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to tell about the `QueryInterface`, that's an implementation detail.

The benefit of the `Query::query()` function is to create a query using **named argument syntax** and **type safety**.

`Query::query(foo: 'bar')` is equivalent to `['foo' => 'bar']`, but adds type contraint on the values.

For more advanced constraints using `$and` and `$or`, we don't need the "key". There is an example here: https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-php-library/blob/v1.x/tests/Builder/Query/AndOperatorTest.php

Author: I will add some explanation about the usefulness of using the Query class

Author: I will also change one of the examples to use and or or

       ...
   ];

You can pass this pipeline to the following methods:

- :phpmethod:`MongoDB\Client::watch()`
- :phpmethod:`MongoDB\Database::watch()`
- :phpmethod:`MongoDB\Collection::watch()`

This example performs the following actions:

- Uses the ``Stage::match()`` method to filter for only change
  events for update operations
- Uses the ``Stage::project()`` method to output only the
  ``operationType``, ``ns`` (namespace), and ``fullDocument`` fields
- Calls the :phpmethod:`MongoDB\Collection::watch()`
  method to open the change stream and sets the ``fullDocument`` option
  to output the full document after update
- Prints change events as they occur

.. io-code-block::
   :copyable:   

   .. input:: /includes/builders.php
      :start-after: start-cs
      :end-before: end-cs
      :language: php
      :dedent:

   .. output::
      :language: json
      :visible: false

      {
        "_id":...,
        "operationType":"update",
        "fullDocument":{"_id":...,"feature_type":"Wrecks - Visible",...},
        "ns":{"db":"sample_geospatial","coll":"shipwrecks"}
      }

To learn more about the information provided by change events, see

> :manual:`Change Events <reference/change-events/>` in the {+mdb-server+} manual.

Reviewer: I: This link is 404ing

Author: was missing a slash! good catch

- Uses the ``Query::or()`` factory method to match documents that
  satisfy the either of the following query clauses:
  
  - Clause that uses the ``Query::regex()`` factory method to check if
    the ``feature_type`` field value contains the string ``'nondangerous'``
  
  - Clause that uses the ``Query::gt()`` factory method to check if the
    ``depth`` field value is greater than ``10.0``

- Calls the :phpmethod:`MongoDB\Collection::deleteOne()`
  method to delete the first matching document

- Prints the number of deleted documents

.. io-code-block::
   :copyable:   

   .. input:: /includes/builders.php
      :start-after: start-deleteone
      :end-before: end-deleteone
      :language: php
      :dedent:

   .. output::
      :language: none
      :visible: false

      Deleted documents: 1

To learn more about delete operations, see the :ref:`php-write-delete`
guide.

.. _php-builders-update:

Define an Update Document
-------------------------

You can use the ``Stage::set()`` factory method when creating update
documents. Update documents describe the updates to make to target
documents. To learn more about updating documents, see the
:ref:`php-write-update` guide.

> .. important:: Only $set Operator Supported in Update Documents

Reviewer 2: That's confusing. 
Update supports an [aggregation pipeline](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/tutorial/update-documents-with-aggregation-pipeline/), in that case most of the stages can be used.

Or by default that's [update operators](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/operator/update/) that are not supported by the builder yet. They are not stages even if the syntax for `$set` is similar.

Reviewer 2: Yes, you can remove it. We will try to add this as a new feature: [PHPLIB-1638](https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/PHPLIB-1638)
